---
layout: post
title: "Carbon Inertia"
date: 2016-06-28
---

<p>People often talk about how we’re locked in a certain amount of warming: even if we were to immediately stop emitting CO<sub>2</sub>, the planet would keep warming up, for a little while at least. This is because the climate system responds to perturbations on several different time-scales, some of them quite long. In the absence of human intervention, it will also take a long time for atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> levels to return to pre-industrial values through geological processes. These are arguments for reducing emissions as quickly as possible, but a related question I haven’t seen much discussion of is: how many emissions are we locked in for?</p>

<p>What I mean by this is that, assuming we don’t want to tank the global economy and revert to being hunter-gatherers, we will have to emit CO<sub>2</sub> to transition to a carbon-neutral society. Think about replacing every coal and natural gas power station with wind turbines, building electric vehicles to replace all of our current fossil-fuel powered vehicles, changing our land use practices so they don’t emit any net CO<sub>2</sub>, etc. These transformations would all require emitting a significant amount of carbon.</p>

<p>This could be called the “carbon inertia” of our society, and doesn't seem to be discussed very often. For instance, two of the “wedges” proposed by <a href="http://cmi.princeton.edu/wedges/">Socolow and Pacala</a> are (1) increasing wind electricity capacity by a factor of ten relative to today, and (2) doubling the average fuel efficiency of cars from 30mpg to 60mpg. These are both worthwhile goals, but as far as I can tell the authors don’t take into account how much carbon would be emitted building all these wind turbines and high-efficiency cars.</p>

<p>In the worst case, we would have to burn all the available fossil fuels just to transform to a carbon neutral society. In a slightly better case it would be possible to go through with this transformation while leaving a significant amount of carbon in the ground, but doing this would require the process to be highly optimized. It’s hard to imagine countries successfully co-ordinating and co-operating to the extent that this would require. In the best case, of course, we would be able to overhaul our energy infrastructure without emitting much CO<sub>2</sub> at all.</p>

<p>Calculating our carbon inertia is hard. It would be relatively easy if we had perfect integrated assessment models and could explore different possibilities. But to give an order of magnitude estimate, let’s first take the "increasing wind capacity by a factor of ten" wedge. <a href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00464.x/abstract">This estimate</a> gives the mean lifecycle emissions of wind-turbines as about 12 g CO<sub>2</sub>-eq / kWh. We need to go from a capacity of about <a href="http://cmi.princeton.edu/wedges/wind_power.php">60 TWh to about 6000 TWh</a>. The total emissions for this increase in capacity is then roughly
5940 x 10<sup>12</sup> x 12 / 10<sup>3</sup> / 10<sup>6</sup> = 71.3 Mtons CO<sub>2</sub>-eq. Given that annual global CO<sub>2</sub> emissions are about 10 Gtons, this is encouraging.</p>

<p>Now let's take the "doubling the average fuel efficiency of cars" wedge. Presumably, this means replacing every inefficient car with a more efficient one. Suppose instead we replaced every non-electric car with an electric car that effectively had zero emissions (assuming the electricity was generated by renewables). Let's also assume that manufacturing an electric car requires the same emissions as manufacturing a regular car (in fact building electric cars often requires slightly more carbon). There are about 1 billion cars in the world and <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/sep/23/carbon-footprint-new-car">this article</a> gives an estimate of 20 tons CO<sub>2</sub>-eq to build a standard-sized car. Replacing every car on Earth would thus require 20 Gtons CO<sub>2</sub>-eq; roughly the same order of magnitude as two years' worth of global emissions.</p>

<p>So we have estimates of about 1% of annual global CO<sub>2</sub> emissions and about 200% annual global CO<sub>2</sub> emissions for the two wedges. If we assume that these roughly bracket the range of the required transformations, 5-10 years seems like a reasonable first guess for our current carbon inertia, on top of our regular emissions (which, to be fair, would be decreasing over the course of the transition). This is better than I expected, though it would be good to look at other possible transformations and also think about other limiting factors, like the finite supply of rare-Earth metals. But it does suggest that we could successfully transition to a carbon-neutral society while leaving some carbon in the ground.</p>








